README.md, before:

# Pyxis
A tool for detecting enriched motifs from ChIP-seq peaks using known motif position weight matrices (PWMs). Implemented as part of Advanced Bioinformatics Laboratory (CSE 185) final project at UC San Diego. 

**Currently in progress.**

## Dependencies
`pyxis` requires the following libraries to be installed:

- pyfaidx
- numpy
- pandas
- scipy
- seqlogo

You can install these with `pip`:
```
pip install [--user] pyfaidx numpy pandas scipy seqlogo
```
(Note: Please specify `--user` option to install locally if you do not have root access.)

## Installation
Once the required libraries have been installed, `pyxis` can now be installed with the following:
```
git clone https://github.com/evelynsq/pyxis.git
cd pyxis
python setup.py install [--user]
```
If the installation was successful, you should see a helpful message when typing `pyxis --help`. Please see [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting) below for resolving potential installation issues.

## Basic Usage
The basic usage of `pyxis` is:
```
pyxis peaks.bed ref.fa pwms.motifs [--background bg.bed] [other options]
```

To run `pyxis` on a small test example using the provided files:
```
pyxis example-files/peaks.bed example-files/ref.fa example-files/test.pwms [-b example-files/background.bed]
```
Something similar to the output below should be produced:
```
	motif_name      	pval   log_pval  num_peak_motif  pct_peak_motif  num_bg_motif    pct_bg_motif    enriched_status
0       BACH2_HUMAN.H11MO.0.A   1.0     0.0     	3       	0.3     	2		0.2		Non-sig
1       ALX3_HUMAN.H11MO.0.D    1.0     0.0     	2       	0.2     	3       	0.3     	Non-sig
2       ELK1_HUMAN.H11MO.0.B    1.0     0.0     	0       	0.0     	1      		0.1     	Non-sig
3       KAISO_HUMAN.H11MO.1.A   1.0     0.0     	2       	0.2     	1       	0.1    		Non-sig
4       MLX_HUMAN.H11MO.0.D     1.0     0.0     	1       	0.1     	1       	0.1   		Non-sig
```
To compare to the output of the analogous command `findMotifsGenome.pl` from [HOMER](http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/):
```
findMotifsGenome.pl \
 example-files/peaks.bed \
 example-files/ref.fa \
 example-files/test.pwms
```

## pyxis Options
- `-h`, `--help`: Show help message and exit.
- `-o FILE`, `--output FILE`: Direct output stream to specified file. **Default**: written to stdout.
- `-b FILE`, `--background FILE`: Use specified BED file for background peaks in motif-finding. **Default**: Background sequences are randomly generated from the reference genome.
- `-p PVAL`, `--pval PVAL`: Threshold p-value for enrichment significance. **Default**: 1e-5.
- `-s`, `--seqlogo`: Generate sequence logo for enriched motif. **Default**: True.
- `--pseudo VAL`: Pseudocount for offsetting log2-odds PWM scores to PPM for generating sequence logos. Minimum value is 1e-5. **Default**: 1e-10.
- `--version`: Print version and exit.

## File format

### Known Motif PWMS file
This tab-delimited input file should contain the PWMs of known motifs, but transposed with columns representing A, C, G and T nucleotides and the rows being the motif sequence. The header for each motif consists of the motif name, as well as an alphabet length `alength` (the size of 4 for DNA's bases) and `w` number of positions in the motif specifying the overall dimensions for its PWM.

```
motif_name	alength=4	w=18
PWM[i,A]	PWM[i,C]	PWM[i,G]	PWM[i,T]
PWM[i+1,A]	PWM[i+1,C]	PWM[i+1,G]	PWM[i+1,T]
```

### Peaks BED file
The input peaks file follows a standard [BED format](https://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html) with the following columns:
1. `chr`: Chromosome number.
2. `start`: Starting position in sequence.
3. `end`: Ending position in sequence. Note: Position numbers are 0-based with [start,end).
4. `peakID`: Identifier name of peak.
5. `strand`: + for forward, - for negative strand.

The file is tab-delimited and should look something like this:
```
chr	start	end	peakID		score	strand
9	30	56	MUSC.0001	900	+
```

### Reference Genome FASTA file
The reference genome file is in [FASTA format](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/fastaformat/). Rows starting with a carat (">") 
specify the chromosome number, followed by the chromosome's nucleotide sequence on the next line.

```
>chr6
ACTGTTTACTACTATCGACCCGTAAATCAT....
>chr7
TCGTTGATACCGTACATGCGATCGGATCGA....
```

### Output TSV file
The output file `pyxis_enrichments.tsv` contains several resulting statistics from our motif enrichment, including:
1. `motif_name`: identifier for motif.
2. `pval`: p-value for the motif being significantly enriched in the input peaks.
3. `log_pval`: log-10 of the p-value.
4. `num_peak_motif`: number of peaks that matched this motif.
5. `pct_peak_motif`: fraction of all peaks that matched motif.
6. `num_bg_motif`: number of background sequences that matched this motif.
7. `pct_bg_motif`: fraction of all peaks that matched motif.
8. `enriched_status`: significance of enrichment in this motif, given a user-specified p-value threshold or otherwise a default of 1e-5. 
```
motif_name		pval	   log_pval	num_peak_motif	pct_peak_motif	num_bg_motif	pct_bg_motif	enriched_status
ATF1_HUMAN.H11MO.0.B	1.23E-4	   -3.91009	5		0.2		3		0.1		Non-sig             
```

### Motif Sequence Logo
If the option `-s` or `--seqlogo` is specified, a motif sequence logo for each motif will be printed. You can read more about `seqlogo` [here](https://pypi.org/project/seqlogo/).

### Background BED file
The user-specified background file also follows the same format as the above [input peaks BED file](#peaks-bed-file).

**Note**: the background should have the same number of sequences specified as the number of peaks in `peaks.bed`, and the background sequences should also be the same lengths as the peak sequences.

## Troubleshooting
If you encounter a message such as **"pyxis: command not found"** when trying to run `pyxis`:
> Please check the following message in the output you should have seen when running `python setup.py install [--user]`: **"Installing pyxis script to \<path>"**.
> 
> Using the path that `pyxis` was installed to, run the following: `export PATH=$PATH:<path>` to add this path to your $PATH variable so Linux can find and run `pyxis`.

<br>

If you run into this error: `ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'setuptools'`:
> This is because `setuptools` is required by `setup.py` to work. If you have root access, you can try installing `setuptools` with this command:
> ```lang-js
> sudo apt-get install python3-setuptools
> ```
> Or you can alternatively try out some [other possible solutions](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/14426491/python-3-importerror-no-module-named-setuptools) that may work for you better than the above command.

## Contributors
This repository was created by Evelyn Quan with inspiration from [mypileup](https://github.com/gymreklab/cse185-demo-project).
Feel free to submit a pull request with any proposed corrections or suggestions.

## Testing
Under construction.

Commit message:

Added more clarification on troubleshooting 'command not found' issue

README.md, after:

# Pyxis
A tool for detecting enriched motifs from ChIP-seq peaks using known motif position weight matrices (PWMs). Implemented as part of Advanced Bioinformatics Laboratory (CSE 185) final project at UC San Diego. 

**Currently in progress.**

## Dependencies
`pyxis` requires the following libraries to be installed:

- pyfaidx
- numpy
- pandas
- scipy
- seqlogo

You can install these with `pip`:
```
pip install [--user] pyfaidx numpy pandas scipy seqlogo
```
(Note: Please specify `--user` option to install locally if you do not have root access.)

## Installation
Once the required libraries have been installed, `pyxis` can now be installed with the following:
```
git clone https://github.com/evelynsq/pyxis.git
cd pyxis
python setup.py install [--user]
```
If the installation was successful, you should see a helpful message when typing `pyxis --help`. Please see [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting) below for resolving potential installation issues.

## Basic Usage
The basic usage of `pyxis` is:
```
pyxis peaks.bed ref.fa pwms.motifs [--background bg.bed] [other options]
```

To run `pyxis` on a small test example using the provided files:
```
pyxis example-files/peaks.bed example-files/ref.fa example-files/test.pwms [-b example-files/background.bed]
```
Something similar to the output below should be produced:
```
	motif_name      	pval   log_pval  num_peak_motif  pct_peak_motif  num_bg_motif    pct_bg_motif    enriched_status
0       BACH2_HUMAN.H11MO.0.A   1.0     0.0     	3       	0.3     	2		0.2		Non-sig
1       ALX3_HUMAN.H11MO.0.D    1.0     0.0     	2       	0.2     	3       	0.3     	Non-sig
2       ELK1_HUMAN.H11MO.0.B    1.0     0.0     	0       	0.0     	1      		0.1     	Non-sig
3       KAISO_HUMAN.H11MO.1.A   1.0     0.0     	2       	0.2     	1       	0.1    		Non-sig
4       MLX_HUMAN.H11MO.0.D     1.0     0.0     	1       	0.1     	1       	0.1   		Non-sig
```
To compare to the output of the analogous command `findMotifsGenome.pl` from [HOMER](http://homer.ucsd.edu/homer/):
```
findMotifsGenome.pl \
 example-files/peaks.bed \
 example-files/ref.fa \
 example-files/test.pwms
```

## pyxis Options
- `-h`, `--help`: Show help message and exit.
- `-o FILE`, `--output FILE`: Direct output stream to specified file. **Default**: written to stdout.
- `-b FILE`, `--background FILE`: Use specified BED file for background peaks in motif-finding. **Default**: Background sequences are randomly generated from the reference genome.
- `-p PVAL`, `--pval PVAL`: Threshold p-value for enrichment significance. **Default**: 1e-5.
- `-s`, `--seqlogo`: Generate sequence logo for enriched motif. **Default**: True.
- `--pseudo VAL`: Pseudocount for offsetting log2-odds PWM scores to PPM for generating sequence logos. Minimum value is 1e-5. **Default**: 1e-10.
- `--version`: Print version and exit.

## File format

### Known Motif PWMS file
This tab-delimited input file should contain the PWMs of known motifs, but transposed with columns representing A, C, G and T nucleotides and the rows being the motif sequence. The header for each motif consists of the motif name, as well as an alphabet length `alength` (the size of 4 for DNA's bases) and `w` number of positions in the motif specifying the overall dimensions for its PWM.

```
motif_name	alength=4	w=18
PWM[i,A]	PWM[i,C]	PWM[i,G]	PWM[i,T]
PWM[i+1,A]	PWM[i+1,C]	PWM[i+1,G]	PWM[i+1,T]
```

### Peaks BED file
The input peaks file follows a standard [BED format](https://genome.ucsc.edu/FAQ/FAQformat.html) with the following columns:
1. `chr`: Chromosome number.
2. `start`: Starting position in sequence.
3. `end`: Ending position in sequence. Note: Position numbers are 0-based with [start,end).
4. `peakID`: Identifier name of peak.
5. `strand`: + for forward, - for negative strand.

The file is tab-delimited and should look something like this:
```
chr	start	end	peakID		score	strand
9	30	56	MUSC.0001	900	+
```

### Reference Genome FASTA file
The reference genome file is in [FASTA format](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/fastaformat/). Rows starting with a carat (">") 
specify the chromosome number, followed by the chromosome's nucleotide sequence on the next line.

```
>chr6
ACTGTTTACTACTATCGACCCGTAAATCAT....
>chr7
TCGTTGATACCGTACATGCGATCGGATCGA....
```

### Output TSV file
The output file `pyxis_enrichments.tsv` contains several resulting statistics from our motif enrichment, including:
1. `motif_name`: identifier for motif.
2. `pval`: p-value for the motif being significantly enriched in the input peaks.
3. `log_pval`: log-10 of the p-value.
4. `num_peak_motif`: number of peaks that matched this motif.
5. `pct_peak_motif`: fraction of all peaks that matched motif.
6. `num_bg_motif`: number of background sequences that matched this motif.
7. `pct_bg_motif`: fraction of all peaks that matched motif.
8. `enriched_status`: significance of enrichment in this motif, given a user-specified p-value threshold or otherwise a default of 1e-5. 
```
motif_name		pval	   log_pval	num_peak_motif	pct_peak_motif	num_bg_motif	pct_bg_motif	enriched_status
ATF1_HUMAN.H11MO.0.B	1.23E-4	   -3.91009	5		0.2		3		0.1		Non-sig             
```

### Motif Sequence Logo
If the option `-s` or `--seqlogo` is specified, a motif sequence logo for each motif will be printed. You can read more about `seqlogo` [here](https://pypi.org/project/seqlogo/).

### Background BED file
The user-specified background file also follows the same format as the above [input peaks BED file](#peaks-bed-file).

**Note**: the background should have the same number of sequences specified as the number of peaks in `peaks.bed`, and the background sequences should also be the same lengths as the peak sequences.

## Troubleshooting
If you encounter a message such as **"pyxis: command not found"** when trying to run `pyxis`:
> Please check the following message in the output you should have seen when running `python setup.py install [--user]`: **"Installing pyxis script to \<path>"**.
> 
> Using the path that `pyxis` was installed to, run the following: `export PATH=$PATH:<path>` to add this path to your $PATH variable so Linux can find and run `pyxis`.
> Typically, your command should look something like **"export PATH=$PATH:/home/\<user>/.local/bin"**, but this can vary depending on where the script installed for you.

<br>

If you run into this error: `ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'setuptools'`:
> This is because `setuptools` is required by `setup.py` to work. If you have root access, you can try installing `setuptools` with this command:
> ```lang-js
> sudo apt-get install python3-setuptools
> ```
> Or you can alternatively try out some [other possible solutions](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/14426491/python-3-importerror-no-module-named-setuptools) that may work for you better than the above command.

## Contributors
This repository was created by Evelyn Quan with inspiration from [mypileup](https://github.com/gymreklab/cse185-demo-project).
Feel free to submit a pull request with any proposed corrections or suggestions.

## Testing
Under construction.
